# C# Software Development

## Overview

## Computer basics

## How does a computer work
A computer takes input, processes it, and gives output. 

<!-- We call this "computing" or "processing" -->

## History of computers
- The first computers were mechanical (they used gears and levers, and didn't use electricity)
- The first electronic computers were vacuum tubes
- The first transistor computers were built in the 1950s
- The first integrated circuit computers were built in the 1960s
- The first microprocessor computers were built in the 1970s
- The first personal computers were built in the 1980s

### TL;DR
Early computers had no software. They were just a bunch of switches and wires. You had to change the hardware to change the behavior of the computer. Later, computers had software. You could change the behavior of the computer by changing the software.

<!--Imagine that todays computer suddenly became read-only. You could not change the software. You could only change the hardware. What would you do? -->

## Software 
- Programming is the process of writing instructions for a computer to follow.
- A program is a set of instructions for a computer to follow.
- Code is the instructions that make up a program.

## Instructing the CPU
- The CPU works with binary instructions (they are different between x86, x64, ARM, Apple Silicon, etc.)
- A common low level language for writing instructions is Assembly (`JMP`, `MOV`, `ADD`, etc.)
- A higher level language is C# (which is what we will be using)
- An even higher level language would be human language (which is what we will be using to communicate with each other)

<!-- Basically our job as developers is translating-->

## What happens if you turn on a computer?
- The CPU starts executing the instructions in the ROM
- The ROM contains the BIOS (Basic Input/Output System)
- The BIOS is responsible for initializing the hardware
- The BIOS loads the operating system (OS) from the hard drive
- The OS is responsible for managing the hardware and running applications

## Todays Development
- All the above is still true, but we don't have to worry about it
- We have great tools

<!--In the past a wrong instruction at the wrong time could blow up the computer, this is no longer case. -->

## Hello world

### The hard way

<!-- Because we can... -->

1. Open notepad.exe
2. Type `System.Console.WriteLine("Hello world!");`
3. Save the file as `HelloWorld.cs`
4. Open "Developer Command Prompt"
5. Navigate to the folder where you saved the file (using `cd` to change directory)
6. Type `csc HelloWorld.cs`
7. Type `HelloWorld.exe`

### Congratulations

- You just wrote your first program in C#!
- That means you are now a programmer!

## Dotnet
- Dotnet exist out of two elements: the runtime and the framework
- The runtime is responsible for executing IL-code
- When we wrote `csc HelloWorld.cs` we compiled our code from C# into IL-code

## The steps

### Human
This is what a user asks the developer to do:
> "I want to see a message on the screen that says 'Hello world!'"

### C#
This is what the developer writes in C#:
```cs
System.Console.WriteLine("Hello world!");`
```
### IL (Intermediate Language)
This is the IL-code that is generated by the compiler and stored in the `HelloWorld.exe` file:
```il
IL_0000	ldstr	"Hello world!"
IL_0005	call	Console.WriteLine (String)
IL_000A	ret	
```

### x64 Assembly
When the runtime executes the IL-code, it translates it into x64 assembly code:

```asm
L0000	mov	rcx, 0x13286c12568
L000a	mov	rcx, [rcx]
L000d	jmp	qword ptr [0x7ffe3624fc90]
```

## Tools
- Visual Studio: IDE (Integrated Development Environment)
- Compiler: A program that converts code from one language to another.
- Debugger: A program that helps you find bugs in your code.
- Code: The instructions that make up a program.
- Coding: The process of writing code.
- Programming: The skill with which we instruct/program a device to do what we want it to do.

## Let's do some coding

> "Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic"

Rules:
- If anything at the end of the first day feels like magic, let me know!
- If you have a question, ask it